Excerpt from "Chip War: The Fight for the World's Most Critical Technology" by Chris Miller

As the USS Mustin steamed southward in August 2020, the
world was just beginning to reckon with our reliance on
semiconductors-and our dependence on Taiwan, which
fabricates the chips that produce a third of the new computing
power we use each year. Taiwan's TSMC builds almost all the
world's most advanced processor chips. When COVID slammed
into the world in 2020, it disrupted the chip industry, too. Some
factories were temporarily shuttered. Purchases of chips for autos
slumped. Demand for PC and data center chips spiked higher, as
much of the world prepared to work from home. Then, over 2021, 
a series of accidents-a fire in a Japanese semiconductor facility;
ice storms in Texas, a center of U.S. chipmaking; and a new round
of COVID lockdowns in Malaysia, where many chips are
assembled and tested-intensified these disruptions. Suddenly,
many industries far from Silicon Valley faced debilitating chip
shortages. Big carmakers from Toyota to General Motors had to
shut factories for weeks because they couldn't acquire the
semiconductors they needed. Shortages of even the simplest
chips caused factory closures on the opposite side of the world. It
seemed like a perfect image of globalization gone wrong.

Political leaders in the U.S., Europe, and Japan hadn't thought
much about semiconductors in decades. Like the rest of us, they
thought "tech" meant search engines or social media, not silicon
wafers. When Joe Biden and Angela Merkel asked why their
country's car factories were shuttered, the answer was shrouded
behind semiconductor supply chains of bewildering complexity. A
typical chip might be designed with blueprints from the
Japanese-owned, UK-based company called Arm, by a team of
engineers in California and Israel, using design software from the
United States. When a design is complete, it's sent to a facility in
Taiwan, which buys ultra-pure silicon wafers and specialized gases
from Japan. The design is carved into silicon using some of the
world's most precise machinery, which can etch, deposit, and
measure layers of materials a few atoms thick. These tools are
produced primarily by five companies, one Dutch, one Japanese, 
and three Californian, without which advanced chips are basically
impossible to make. Then the chip is packaged and tested, often
in Southeast Asia, before being sent to China for assembly into a
phone or computer.

If any one of the steps in the semiconductor production
process is interrupted, the world's supply of new computing
power is imperiled. In the age of AI, it's often said that data is the
new oil. Yet the real limitation we face isn't the availability of data
but of processing power. There's a finite number of
semiconductors that can store and process data. Producing them
is mind-bogglingly complex and horrendously expensive. Unlike
oil, which can be bought from many countries, our production of
computing power depends fundamentally on a series of choke
points: tools, chemicals, and software that often are produced by a
handful of companies-and sometimes only by one. No other
facet of the economy is so dependent on so few firms. Chips from
Taiwan provide 37 percent of the world's new computing power
each year. Two Korean companies produce 44 percent of the
world's memory chips. The Dutch company ASML builds 100
percent of the world's extreme ultraviolet lithography machines,
without which cutting-edge chips are simply impossible to make.
OPEC's 40 percent share of world oil production looks
unimpressive by comparison.

The global network of companies that annually produces a
trillion chips at nanometer scale is a triumph of efficiency. It's 
also a staggering vulnerability. The disruptions of the pandemic
provide just a glimpse of what a single well-placed earthquake
could do to the global economy. Taiwan sits atop a fault line that
as recently as 1999 produced an earthquake measuring 7.3 on the
Richter scale. Thankfully, this only knocked chip production
offline for a couple of days. But it's only a matter of time before a
stronger quake strikes Taiwan. A devastating quake could also hit
Japan, an earthquake-prone country that produces 17 percent of
the world's chips, or Silicon Valley, which today produces few
chips but builds crucial chipmaking machinery in facilities sitting
atop the San Andreas Fault.
Yet the seismic shift that most imperils semiconductor supply
today isn't the crash of tectonic plates but the clash of great
powers. As China and the United States struggle for supremacy,
both Washington and Beijing are fixated on controlling the future
of computing-and, to a frightening degree, that future is
dependent on a small island that Beijing considers a renegade
province and America has committed to defend by force.