Excerpt from "Wild" by Cheryl Strayed

The trees were tall, but I was taller, standing above them on a steep
mountain slope in northern California. Moments before, I'd removed
my hiking boots and the left one had fallen into those trees, first
catapulting into the air when my enormous backpack toppled onto it,
then skittering across the gravelly trail and flying over the edge. It
bounced off of a rocky outcropping several feet beneath me before
disappearing into the forest canopy below, impossible to retrieve. I let
out a stunned gasp, though I'd been in the wilderness thirty-eight days
and by then I'd come to know that anything could happen and that
everything would. But that doesn't mean I wasn't shocked when it did.
My boot was gone. Actually gone.
I clutched its mate to my chest like a baby, though of course it was
futile. What is one boot without the other boot? It is nothing. It is
useless, an orphan forevermore, and I could take no mercy on it. It
was a big lug of a thing, of genuine heft, a brown leather Raichle boot
with a red lace and silver metal fasts. I lifted it high and threw it with
all my might and watched it fall into the lush trees and out of my life.
I was alone. I was barefoot. I was twenty-six years old and an
orphan too. An actual stray, a stranger had observed a couple of weeks
before, when I'd told him my name and explained how very loose I
was in the world. My father left my life when I was six. My mother
died when I was twenty-two. In the wake of her death, my stepfather
morphed from the person I considered my dad into a man I only
occasionally recognized. My two siblings scattered in their grief, in
spite of my efforts to hold us together, until I gave up and scattered as
well.
In the years before I pitched my boot over the edge of that
mountain, I'd been pitching myself over the edge too. I'd ranged and
roamed and railed-from Minnesota to New York to Oregon and all
across the West-until at last I found myself, bootless, in the summer
of 1995, not so much loose in the world as bound to it.
It was a world I'd never been to and yet had known was there all
along, one I'd staggered to in sorrow and confusion and fear and
hope. A world I thought would both make me into the woman I knew
I could become and turn me back into the girl I'd once been. A world
that measured two feet wide and 2,663 miles long.
A world called the Pacific Crest Trail.
I'd first heard of it only seven months before, when I was living in
Minneapolis, sad and desperate and on the brink of divorcing a man I
still loved. I'd been standing in line at an outdoor store waiting to
purchase a foldable shovel when I picked up a book called The Pacific
Crest Trail, Volume 1: California from a nearby shelf and read the back
cover. The PCT, it said, was a continuous wilderness trail that went
from the Mexican border in California to just beyond the Canadian
border along the crest of nine mountain ranges-the Laguna, San
Jacinto, San Bernardino, San Gabriel, Liebre, Tehachapi, Sierra
Nevada, Klamath, and Cascades. That distance was a thousand miles
as the crow flies, but the trail was more than double that. Traversing
the entire length of the states of California, Oregon, and Washington,
the PCT passes through national parks and wilderness areas as well as
federal, tribal, and privately held lands; through deserts and
mountains and rain forests; across rivers and highways. I turned the
book over and gazed at its front cover, a boulder-strewn lake
surrounded by rocky crags against a blue sky, then placed it back on
the shelf, paid for my shovel, and left.