Excerpt from "This is How They Tell Me the World Ends" by Nicole Perlroth

On June 27, 2017, Russia fired the NSA's cyberweapons into
Ukraine in what became the most destructive and costly cyberattack
in world history. That afternoon Ukrainians woke up to black screens
everywhere. They could not take money from ATMs, pay for gas at
stations, send or receive mail, pay for a train ticket, buy groceries,
get paid, or-perhaps most terrifying of all-monitor radiation levels
at Chernobyl. And that was just in Ukraine.
The attack hit any company that did any business in Ukraine. All it
took was a single Ukrainian employee working remotely for the
attack to shut down entire networks. Computers at Pfizer and Merck,
the pharmaceutical companies; at Maersk, the shipping
conglomerate; at FedEx, and at a Cadbury chocolate factory in
Tasmania were all hijacked. The attack even boomeranged back on
Russia, destroying data at Rosneft, Russia's state-owned oil giant,
and Evraz, the steelmaker owned by two Russian oligarchs. The
Russians had used the NSA's stolen code as a rocket to propel its
malware around the globe. The hack that circled the world would
cost Merck and FedEx, alone, $1 billion.
By the time I visited Kyiv in 2019, the tally of damages from that
single Russian attack exceeded $10 billion, and estimates were still
climbing. Shipping and railway systems had still not regained full
capacity. All over Ukraine, people were still trying to find packages
that had been lost when the shipment tracking systems went down.
They were still owed pension checks that had been held up in the
attack. The records of who was owed what had been obliterated.
Security researchers had given the attack an unfortunate name:
NotPetya. They initially assumed it was ransomware called Petya,
only to find out later that Russian hackers had specifically designed
NotPetya to appear as run-of-the-mill ransomware, though it was not
ransomware at all. Even if you paid the ransom, there was no
chance of getting any data back. This was a nation-state weapon
designed to exact mass destruction.
I spent the next two weeks in Ukraine ducking frigid air blasts
from Siberia. I met with journalists. I walked Independence Square
with protesters as they recounted the bloodiest days of the
revolution. I trekked out to the industrial zone to meet with digital
detectives who walked me through the digital wreckage of NotPetya.
I met with Ukrainians whose family business-tax reporting software
used by every major Ukrainian agency and company-had been
Patient Zero for the attacks. The Russians had cleverly disguised
their malware as a tax software update from the company's systems,
and now all its mom-and-pop operators could do was half cry, half
laugh at the role they had played in nation-state cyberwar. I spoke
with the head of Ukraine's cyber police force and with any Ukrainian
minister who would have me.
I visited with American diplomats at the U.S. embassy just before
they became entangled in the impeachment of President Donald
Trump. On the day I visited, they were overwhelmed by Russia's
latest disinformation campaign: Russian trolls had been inundating
Facebook pages frequented by young Ukrainian mothers with antivaccination propaganda. This, as the country reeled from the worst
measles outbreak in modern history. Ukraine now had one of the
lowest vaccination rates in the world and the Kremlin was
capitalizing on the chaos. Ukraine's outbreak was already spreading
back to the States, where Russian trolls were now pushing antivaxxer memes on Americans. American officials seemed at a loss for
how to contain it. (And they were no better prepared when, one year
later, Russians seized on the pandemic to push conspiracy theories
that Covid-19 was an American-made bioweapon, or a sinister plot
by Bill Gates to profit off vaccines.) There seemed no bottom to the
lengths Russia was willing to go to divide and conquer.